A Job is the unit of work which is executed. A Job is described by a
DAG, which describes the computation to be performed, and the inputs and
outputs of the computation.

[`Job`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/latest-dev/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/Job.html)
is a handle to the execution of a `DAG`. To create a job, supply the `DAG`
to a previously created `JetInstance` as shown below:

```java
JetInstance jet = Jet.newJetInstance(); // or Jet.newJetClient();
DAG dag = new DAG();
dag.newVertex(..);
jet.newJob(dag).execute().get();
```

As hinted in the code example, the job submission API is identical
whether you use it from a client machine or directly on an instance of a
Jet cluster member. This works because the `Job` instance is
serializable and the client can send it over the network when submitting
the job. The same `Job` instance can be submitted for execution many
times.

Job execution is asynchronous. The `execute()` call returns as soon as
the Jet cluster has been contacted and the serialized job is sent to it.
The user gets a `Future` which can be inspected or waited on to find out
the outcome of a computation job. It is also cancelable and can send a
cancelation command to the Jet cluster.

Note that the `Future` only signals the status of the job, it does not
contain the result of the computation. The DAG explicitly models the
storing of results via its **sink** vertices. Typically the results will
be in a Hazelcast map or another structure and have to be accessed by
their own API after the job is done.

## Deploy your Resources

If the Jet cluster has not been started with all the job's computation
code already on the classpath, you have to deploy the code together
with the Job instance:

```java
JobConfig config = new JobConfig();
config.addJar("..");
jet.newJob(dag, config).execute().get();
```

When reading and writing data to the underlying Hazelcast IMDG instance,
keep in mind that the deployed code is available **only** within the
scope of the executing Jet job.
