[[introduction-to-jet]]
= Introduction

Hazelcast Jet is a distributed data processing engine, built for
high-performance batch and stream processing. It reuses some features
and services of http://www.hazelcast.org[Hazelcast In-Memory Data
Grid] (IMDG), but is otherwise a separate product with features not
available in the IMDG.

Jet provides you with the simple and expressive <<pipeline-api, Pipeline
API>> with which you can perform complex transforming and aggregating
tasks that can combine the input from several data sources. It also
offers a distributed implementation of
https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/stream/package-summary.html[java.util.stream],
with which you can achieve some simple transformations of a single data
source using the API familiar from Java 8.

With Hazelcastâ€™s IMDG providing storage functionality, Hazelcast Jet
performs parallel execution to enable data-intensive applications to
operate in near real-time. Using directed acyclic graphs (DAG) to model
relationships between individual steps in the data processing pipeline,
Hazelcast Jet can execute both batch and stream-based data processing
applications. Jet handles the parallel execution using the _green
thread_ approach to optimize the utilization of the computing resources.

Jet Achieves breakthrough speeds by keeping both the computation and
data storage in memory. The embedded Hazelcast IMDG provides elastic
in-memory storage and is a great tool for storing the results of a
computation or as a cache for datasets to be used during the
computation. This way Jet can achieve extremely low end-to-end
latencies.

Jet is very simple to use &mdash; in particular, it can be fully
embedded for OEMs and for Microservices &mdash; making it is easier for
manufacturers to build and maintain next-generation systems. Also, Jet
uses Hazelcast discovery for finding the members in the cluster, which
can be used in both on-premise and cloud environments.

[[architecture-overview]]
== Architecture Overview

image::architecture-overview.png[Architecture,align="center"]

[[clustering-and-discovery]]
== Clustering and Discovery

Hazelcast Jet typically runs on several machines that form a cluster but
it may also run on a single JVM for testing purposes.
There are several ways to configure the members for discovery, explained
in detail in the {hz-refman}#setting-up-clusters[Hazelcast IMDG Reference
Manual].

[[members-and-clients]]
== Members and Clients

A Hazelcast Jet _instance_ is a unit where the processing takes place.
There can be multiple instances per JVM, however this only makes sense
for testing. An instance becomes a _member_ of a cluster: it can join
and leave clusters multiple times during its lifetime. Any instance can
be used to access a cluster, giving an appearance that the entire
cluster is available locally.

On the other hand, a _client instance_ is just an accessor to a cluster
and no processing takes place in it.

[[relationship-with-imdg]]
== Relationship with Hazelcast IMDG

Hazelcast Jet leans on http://www.hazelcast.org[Hazelcast IMDG] for
cluster formation and maintenance, data partitioning, and networking.
For more information on Hazelcast IMDG, see the {hz-refman}[latest Hazelcast
Reference Manual].

As Jet is built on top of the Hazelcast platform, there is a tight
integration between Jet and IMDG. A Jet job is implemented as a
Hazelcast IMDG proxy, similar to the other services and data structures
in Hazelcast. The Hazelcast Operations are used for different actions
that can be performed on a job. Jet can also be used with the Hazelcast
Client, which uses the Hazelcast Open Binary Protocol to communicate
different actions to the server instance.

[[read-write-imdg-dds]]
=== Reading from and Writing to Hazelcast Distributed Data Structures

Jet embeds Hazelcast IMDG. Therefore, Jet can use Hazelcast IMDG maps,
caches and lists on the embedded cluster as sources and sinks of data
and make use of data locality. A Hazelcast `IMap` or `ICache` is
distributed by partitions across the cluster and Jet members are able to
efficiently read from the Map or Cache by having each member read just
its local partitions. Since the whole `IList` is stored on a single
partition, all the data will be read on the single member that owns that
partition. When using a map, cache or list as a Sink, it is not possible
to directly make use of data locality because the emitted key-value pair
may belong to a non-local partition. In this case the pair must be
transmitted over the network to the member which owns that particular
partition.

Jet can also use any remote Hazelcast IMDG instance via Hazelcast IMDG
connector.

[[high-availability-and-fault-tolerance]]
== High Availability and Fault Tolerance

Jet provides highly available and fault tolerant distributed computation.
If one of the cluster members fails and leaves the cluster, Jet
automatically and transparently restarts the job on the remaining
members. Jet achieves this by maintaining consistent replicas of the job
metadata around the cluster. You don't have to designate any node as the
master.

Jet achieves fault tolerance in streaming jobs by making a snapshot of
the internal processing state at regular intervals. If a member of the
cluster fails while a job is running, Jet will detect this and restart
the job on the new cluster topology. It will restore its internal state
from the snapshot and tell the source to start sending data from the
last "`committed`" position (where the snapshot was taken). The data
source must have built-in support to replay the data from the given
checkpoint.

[[elasticity]]
== Elasticity

Hazelcast Jet supports the scenario where a new member joins the cluster
while a job is running. Currently the ongoing job will not be re-planned
to start using the member, though; this is on the roadmap for a future
version. The new member can also leave the cluster while the job is
running and this won't affect its progress.

One caveat is the special kind of member allowed by the Hazelcast IMDG:
a _lite member_. These members don't get any partitions assigned to them
and will malfunction when attempting to run a DAG with partitioned
edges. Lite members should not be allowed to join a Jet cluster.
