Jet accesses data sources and sinks via its _connectors_. They are a
computation job's point of contact with the outside world.

= Concerns

Although the connectors do their best to unify the various kinds of
resources under the same "`data stream`" paradigm, there are still many
concerns that need your attention.

== Is it Unbounded?

The first decision when building a Jet computation job is whether it
will deal with bounded or unbounded data. A typical example of a bounded
resource is a persistent storage system, whereas an unbounded one is
usually like a FIFO queue, discarding old data. This is true both for
sources and sinks.

Bounded data is handled in batch jobs and there are less concerns to
deal with. Examples of finite resources are the Hazelcast `IMap`/`ICache`
and the Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS). In the unbounded category
the most popular choice is Kafka, but a Hazelcast `IMap`/`ICache` can
also be used as an infinite source of update events (via the Event
Journal feature). You can also set up an `IMap`/`ICache` as a sink for
an infinite amount of data, either by ensuring that the size of the
keyset will be finite or by allowing the eviction of old entries.

== Is it Replayable?

Most finite data sources are replayable because they come from
persistent storage. You can easily replay the whole dataset. However, an
infinite data source may be of such nature that it can be consumed only
once. An example is the TCP socket connector. Such sources are bad at
fault tolerance: if anything goes wrong during the computation, it
cannot be retried.

=== Does it Support Checkpointing?

It would be quite impractical if you could only replay an infinite data
stream from the very beginning. This is why you need _checkpointing_:
the ability of the stream source to replay its data from the point you
choose, discarding everything before it. Both Kafka and the Hazelcast
Event Journal support this.

== Is it Distributed?

A distributed computation engine prefers to work with distributed data
resources. If the resource is not distributed, all Jet members will have
to contend for access to a single endpoint. Kafka, HDFS, `IMap` and
`ICache` are all distributed. On the other hand, an `IList` is not; it iss stored on a single member and all append operations to it
must be serialized. When using it as a source, only one Jet member will
be pulling its data.

A `file` source/sink is another example of a non-distributed data
source, but with a different twist: it's more of a "manually
distributed" resource. Each member will access its own local filesystem,
which means there will be no contention, but there will also be no
global coordination of the data. To use it as a source, you have to
prepare the files on each machine so each Jet member gets its part of
the data. When used as a sink, you'll have to manually gather all the
pieces that Jet created around the cluster.

== What about Data Locality?

If you're looking to achieve record-breaking throughput for your
application, you'll have to think carefully how close you can deliver
your data to the location where Jet will consume and process it. For
example, if your source is HDFS, you should align the topologies of the
Hadoop and Jet clusters so that each machine that hosts an HDFS member
also hosts a Jet member. Jet will automatically figure this out and
arrange for each member to consume only the slice of data stored
locally.

If you're using `IMap`/`ICache` as data sources, you have two basic
choices: have Jet connect to a Hazelcast IMDG cluster, or use Jet itself
to host the data (since a Jet cluster is at the same time a Hazelcast
IMDG cluster). In the second case Jet will automatically ensure a
data-local access pattern, but there's a caveat: if the Jet job causes
an error of unrestricted scope, such as `OutOfMemoryError` or
`StackOverflowError`, it will have unpredictable consequences for the
state of the whole Jet member, jeopardizing the integrity of the data
stored on it.

= Overview of Sources and Sinks

The table below gives you a high-level overview of all the source and
sink connectors we deliver with Jet. There are links to Javadoc and
code samples. The sections following this one present each connector in
more detail.


.Sources and Sinks
|===
|Resource|Javadoc|Sample|Unbounded?|Replayable?|Checkpointing?|Distributed?|Data Locality

|<<connector-imdg, IMap>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#map-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.query.Predicate-com.hazelcast.projection.Projection-[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/Sinks.html#map-java.lang.String-[Sink]
|{jet-samples}/batch/hazelcast-connectors/src/main/java/MapSourceAndSink.java[Sample]
|❌
|✅
|❌
|✅
|Src ✅

Sink ❌

|<<connector-imdg, ICache>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#cache-java.lang.String-[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/Sinks.html#cache-java.lang.String-[Sink]
|{jet-samples}/batch/hazelcast-connectors/src/main/java/CacheSourceAndSink.java[Sample]
|❌
|✅
|❌
|✅
|Src ✅

Sink ❌

|<<connector-imdg-external, IMap in another cluster>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#remoteMap-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.client.config.ClientConfig-com.hazelcast.query.Predicate-com.hazelcast.projection.Projection-[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/Sinks.html#remoteMap-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.client.config.ClientConfig-[Sink]
|{jet-samples}/batch/hazelcast-connectors/src/main/java/RemoteMapSourceAndSink.java[Sample]
|❌
|✅
|❌
|✅
|❌

|<<connector-imdg-external, ICache in another cluster>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#remoteCache-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.client.config.ClientConfig-[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/Sinks.html#remoteCache-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.client.config.ClientConfig-[Sink]
|
|❌
|✅
|❌
|✅
|❌

|<<connector-imdg-journal, IMap's Event Journal>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#mapJournal-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedPredicate-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedFunction-boolean-[Source]
|{jet-samples}/streaming/map-journal-source/src/main/java/MapJournalSource.java[Sample]
|✅
|✅
|✅
|✅
|✅


|<<connector-imdg-journal, ICache's Event Journal>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#cacheJournal-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedPredicate-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedFunction-boolean-[Source]
|
|✅
|✅
|✅
|✅
|✅

|Event Journal of IMap in another cluster
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#remoteMapJournal-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.client.config.ClientConfig-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedPredicate-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedFunction-boolean-[Source]
|{jet-samples}/streaming/map-journal-source/src/main/java/RemoteMapJournalSource.java[Sample]
|✅
|✅
|✅
|✅
|❌

|Event Journal of ICache in another cluster
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#remoteCacheJournal-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.client.config.ClientConfig-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedPredicate-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedFunction-boolean-[Source]
|
|✅
|✅
|✅
|✅
|❌

|<<imdg-list, IList>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#list-java.lang.String-[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/Sinks.html#list-java.lang.String-[Sink]
|{jet-samples}/batch/hazelcast-connectors/src/main/java/ListSourceAndSink.java[Sample]
|❌
|✅
|❌
|❌
|✅

|IList in another cluster
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#remoteList-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.client.config.ClientConfig-[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/Sinks.html#remoteList-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.client.config.ClientConfig-[Sink]
|
|❌
|✅
|❌
|❌
|❌

|<<hdfs>>
|{jet-javadoc}/HdfsSources.html[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/HdfsSinks.html[Sink]
|{jet-samples}/batch/wordcount-hadoop/src/main/java/HadoopWordCount.java[Sample]
|❌
|✅
|❌
|✅
|✅

|<<kafka>>
|{jet-javadoc}/KafkaSources.html[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/KafkaSinks.html[Sink]
|{jet-samples}/streaming/kafka-source/src/main/java/KafkaSource.java[Source]
|✅
|✅
|✅
|✅
|❌

|<<connector-files, Files>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#files-java.lang.String-java.nio.charset.Charset-java.lang.String-[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/Sinks.html#files-java.lang.String-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedFunction-java.nio.charset.Charset-boolean-[Sink]
|{jet-samples}/batch/access-log-analyzer/src/main/java/AccessLogAnalyzer.java[Sample]
|❌
|✅
|❌
|❌
|Local FS ✅

 Shared FS ❌

|<<connector-files, File Watcher>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#fileWatcher-java.lang.String-java.nio.charset.Charset-java.lang.String-[Source]
|{jet-samples}/core-api/streaming/access-stream-analyzer/src/main/java/AccessStreamAnalyzer.java[Sample (Core API)]
|✅
|❌
|❌
|❌
|Local FS ✅

 Shared FS ❌

|<<connector-socket, TCP Socket>>
|{jet-javadoc}/Sources.html#socket-java.lang.String-int-java.nio.charset.Charset-[Source]

{jet-javadoc}/Sinks.html#socket-java.lang.String-int-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedFunction-java.nio.charset.Charset-[Sink]
|{jet-samples}/streaming/socket-connector/src/main/java/StreamTextSocket.java[Source]

{jet-samples}/streaming/socket-connector/src/main/java/WriteTextSocket.java[Sink]
|✅
|❌
|❌
|❌
|❌

|Application Log
|{jet-javadoc}/Sinks.html#writeLogger-com.hazelcast.jet.function.DistributedFunction-[Sink]
|{jet-samples}/streaming/enrichment/src/main/java/Enrichment.java[Sink]
|N/A
|N/A
|❌
|❌
|✅
|===
