`Processor` is the main type whose implementation is up to the user: it
contains the code of the computation to be performed by a vertex. There
are a number of Processor building blocks in the Jet API which allow you
to just specify the computation logic, while the provided code
handles the processor's cooperative behavior. Please refer to the
[AbstractProcessor section](/Advanced_Topics/Convenience_API_to_Implement_a_Processor).

A processor's work can be conceptually described as follows: "receive
data from zero or more input streams and emit data into zero or more
output streams." Each stream maps to a single DAG edge (either inbound
or outbound). There is no requirement on the correspondence between
input and output items; a processor can emit any data it sees fit,
including none at all. The same `Processor` abstraction is used for all
kinds of vertices, including sources and sinks.

## Cooperative Multithreading

Cooperative multithreading is one of the core features of Jet and can be
roughly compared to [green
threads](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_threads). It is purely a
library-level feature and does not involve any low-level system or JVM
tricks; the `Processor` API is simply designed in such a way that the
processor can do a small amount of work each time it is invoked, then
yield back to the Jet engine. The engine manages a thread pool of fixed
size and on each thread, the processors take their turn in a round-robin
fashion.

The point of cooperative multithreading is better performance. Several
factors contribute to this:

- The overhead of context switching between processors is much lower
since the operating system's thread scheduler is not involved.
- The worker thread driving the processors stays on the same core for
longer periods, preserving the CPU cache lines.
- The worker thread has direct knowledge of the ability of a processor to
make progress (by inspecting its input/output buffers).

`Processor` instances are cooperative by default. The processor can opt
out of cooperative multithreading by overriding `isCooperative()` to
return `false`. Jet will then start a dedicated thread for it.

### Requirements

To maintain an overall good throughput, a cooperative processor must
take care not to hog the thread for too long (a rule of thumb is up to a
millisecond at a time). Jet's design strongly favors cooperative
processors and most processors can and should be implemented to fit
these requirements. The major exception are sources and sinks because
they often have no choice but calling into blocking I/O APIs.


## The Outbox

The processor sends its output items to its `Outbox`, which has a
separate bucket for each outbound edge. The buckets have limited
capacity and will refuse an item when full. A cooperative processor
should be implemented such that when its item is rejected by the outbox,
it saves its processing state and returns from the processing method.
The execution engine will then drain the outbox buckets.

By contrast, a non-cooperative processor gets an auto-flushing, blocking
outbox that never rejects an item. This can be leveraged to simplify the
processor's implementation; however the simplification alone should
never be the reason to declare a processor non-cooperative.

## Data Processing Callbacks

Two callback methods are involved in data processing: `process()` and
`complete()`. Implementations of these methods can be stateful and do
not need to be thread-safe. A single instance will be called by a single
thread at a time, although not necessarily always the same thread.

### process(ordinal, inbox)

Jet passes the items received over a given edge by calling
`process(ordinal, inbox)`. All items received since the last `process()`
call are in the inbox, but also all the items the processor hasn't
removed in a previous `process()` call. There is a separate instance of
`Inbox` for each  inbound edge, so any given `process()` call involves
items from only one edge.

The processor must not remove an item from the inbox until it has
fully processed it. This is important with respect to the cooperative
behavior: the processor may not be allowed to emit all items
corresponding to a given input item and may need to return from the
`process()` call early, saving its state. In such a case the item should
stay in the inbox so Jet knows the processor has more work to do even if
no new items are received.

### tryProcess()

A job that processes an infinite data stream may experience occasional lulls &mdash; periods with no items arriving. On the other hand, a windowing processor is not allowed to act upon each item immediately due to event skew; it must wait for the punctuation to arrive. During a stream lull this becomes problematic because punctuation itself is primarily data-driven and advances in response to the observation of event timestamps. The punctuation-inserting processor must be able to advance punctuation even during a stream lull, based on the passage of wall-clock time. This is the primary use case for the `tryProcess()` callback, which takes no arguments. It does have a `boolean` return value, and if it returns `false`, then it will be called again before any other methods are called. This way it can retry emitting its output until the outbox accepts it.

### complete()

Jet calls `complete()` after all the input edges are exhausted. It is
the last method to be invoked on the processor before disposing of it.
Typically this is where a batch processor emits the results of an
accumulating operation. If it can't emit everything in a given call, it
should return `false` and will be called again later.
