[TOC]

The DAG-building API is centered around the
[`DAG`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/core/DAG.html)
class. This is a pure data class and can be instantiated on its own,
without a Jet instance. This makes it simple to separate the
job-describing code from the code that manages the lifecycle of Jet
instances. To start building a DAG, you just write

```java
DAG dag = new DAG();
```

A good practice is to structure the DAG-building code into the following
sections:

1. Create all the vertices.
2. Configure the local parallelism of vertices.
3. Create the edges.

Example:

```java
DAG dag = new DAG();

// 1. Create vertices
Vertex source = dag.newVertex("source", Sources.readFiles("."));
Vertex transform = dag.newVertex("transform", Processors.map(
        (String line) -> entry(line, line.length())));
Vertex sink = dag.newVertex("sink", Sinks.writeMap("sinkMap"));

// 2. Configure local parallelism
source.localParallelism(1);

// 3. Create edges
dag.edge(between(source, transform));
dag.edge(between(transform, sink));
```

## Creating a Vertex

The two mandatory elements of creating a vertex are its string
identifier and the supplier of processors. The latter can be provided in
three variants, differing in the degree of explicit control over the
lifecycle management of the processors. From simple to complex they are:

1. [`DistributedSupplier<Processor>`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/function/DistributedSupplier.html)
   directly returns processor instances from its `get()` method. It is
   expected to be stateless and return equivalent instances on each
   call. It doesn't provide any initialization or cleanup code.
2. [`ProcessorSupplier`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/core/ProcessorSupplier.html)
   returns in a single call all the processors that will run on a single
   cluster member. It may specialize each instance, for example to
   achieve local data partitioning. It is also in charge of the
   member-local lifecycle (initialization and destruction).
3. *[`ProcessorMetaSupplier`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/core/ProcessorMetaSupplier.html)*
   returns in a single call an object that will be in charge of creating
   all the processors for a vertex. Given a list of member addresses,
   the object it returns is a `Function<Address, ProcessorSupplier>`
   which will then be called with each of the addresses from the list to
   retrieve the `ProcessorSupplier` specialized for the given member.

Usually you don't have to care, or even know, which of these variants is
used. You'll call a library-provided factory method that returns one or
the other and they will integrate the same way into your `newVertex()`
calls.

## Local and Global Parallelism of Vertex

The vertex is implemented by one or more instances of `Processor` on
each member. Each vertex can specify how many of its processors will run
per cluster member using the `localParallelism` property; every member
will have the same number of processors. A new `Vertex` instance has
this property set to `-1`, which requests to use the default value equal
to the configured size of the cooperative thread pool. The latter
defaults to `Runtime.availableProcessors()` and is configurable via
[`InstanceConfig.setCooperativeThreadCount()`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/config/InstanceConfig.html#setCooperativeThreadCount-int-).

In most cases the only value of local parallelism that you'll want to
explicitly configure is `1` for the cases where no parallelism is
desirable (e.g. on a source processor reading from a file).

The **global parallelism** of the vertex is also an important value,
especially in terms of the distribution of partitions among processors.
It is equal to local parallelism multiplied by the cluster size.


## Edge Ordinal

An edge is connected to a vertex with a given **ordinal**, which
identifies it to the vertex and its processors. When a processor
receives an item, it knows the ordinal of the edge on which the item
came in. Things are similar on the outbound side: the processor emits an
item to a given ordinal, but also has the option to emit the same item
to all ordinals. This is the most typical case and allows easy
replication of a data stream across several edges.

When you use the
[`between()`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/core/Edge.html#between-com.hazelcast.jet.core.Vertex-com.hazelcast.jet.core.Vertex-)
edge factory, the edge will be connected at ordinal 0 at both ends. When
you need a different ordinal, use the
[`from(a, ord1).to(b, ord2)`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/core/Edge.html#from-com.hazelcast.jet.core.Vertex-int-)
form. There must be no gaps in ordinal assignment, which means a vertex
will have inbound edges with ordinals 0..N and outbound edges with
ordinals 0..M.

This example shows the usage of `between()` and `from().to()` forms to
build a DAG with one source feeding two computational vertices:

```java
DAG dag = new DAG();

Vertex source = dag.newVertex("source", Sources.readFiles("."));
Vertex v1 = dag.newVertex("v1", ...);
Vertex v2 = dag.newVertex("v2", ...);

dag.edge(between(source, v1));
dag.edge(from(source, 1).to(v2));
```

## Local and Distributed Edge

A major choice to make in terms of data routing is whether the candidate
set of target processors is unconstrained, encompassing all processors
across the cluster, or constrained to just those running on the same
cluster member. This is controlled by the `distributed` property of the
edge. By default the edge is local and calling the
[`distributed()`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/core/Edge.html#distributed--)
method removes this restriction.

With appropriate DAG design, network traffic can be minimized by
employing local edges. They are implemented with the most
efficient kind of concurrent queue: single-producer, single-consumer
array-backed queue. It employs wait-free algorithms on both sides and
avoids even the latency of `volatile` writes by using `lazySet`.

The quintessential example of employing local-distributed edge combo
is the two-stage aggregation. Here's a review of that setup from the
Word Count tutorial:

```java
dag.edge(between(source, tokenizer))
   .edge(between(tokenizer, accumulate)
           .partitioned(DistributedFunctions.wholeItem(), Partitioner.HASH_CODE))
   .edge(between(accumulate, combine)
           .distributed()
           .partitioned(DistributedFunctions.entryKey()))
   .edge(between(combine, sink));
```

Note that only the edge from `accumulate` to `combine` is distributed.

## Routing Policies

The [routing policy](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/core/Edge.RoutingPolicy.html)
decides which of the processors in the candidate set to route each
particular item to.

### Unicast

This is the default routing policy, the one you get when you write

```java
dag.edge(between(source, tokenizer))
```

For each item it chooses a single destination processor with no further
restrictions on the choice. The only guarantee given by this pattern is
that exactly one processor will receive the item, but typically care
will be taken to "spray" the items equally over all the reception
candidates.

This choice makes sense when the data does not have to be partitioned,
usually implying a downstream vertex which can compute the result based
on each item in isolation.

### Isolated

This is a more restricted kind of unicast policy: any given downstream
processor receives data from exactly one upstream processor. This is
needed in some DAG setups to apply selective backpressure to individual
upstream source processors. Activate this policy by calling
`isolated()` on the edge:

```java
dag.edge(between(source, insertWatermarks).isolated());
```

### Broadcast

A broadcasting edge sends each item to all candidate receivers. This is
useful when some small amount of data must be broadcast to all
downstream vertices. Usually such vertices will have other inbound edges
in addition to the broadcasting one, and will use the broadcast data as
context while processing the other edges. In such cases the broadcasting
edge will have a raised priority. There are other useful combinations,
like a parallelism-one vertex that produces the same result on each
member.

Activate this policy by calling `broadcast()` on the edge:

```java
dag.edge(between(source, count).broadcast());
```

### Partitioned

A partitioned edge sends each item to the one processor responsible for
the item's partition ID. On a distributed edge, this processor will be
unique across the whole cluster. On a local edge, each member will have
its own processor for each partition ID.

Multiple partitions can be assigned to each processor. The global number
of partitions is controlled by the number of partitions in the
underlying Hazelcast IMDG configuration. Please refer to the
[Hazelcast Reference Manual](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/latest/manual/html-single/index.html#data-partitioning)
for more information about Hazelcast IMDG partitioning.

This is the default algorithm to determine the partition ID of an item:

1. Apply the key extractor function defined on the edge to retrieve the
   partitioning key.
2. Serialize the partitioning key to a byte array using Hazelcast
   serialization.
3. Apply Hazelcast's standard `MurmurHash3`-based algorithm to get the
   key's hash value.
4. Partition ID is the hash value modulo the number of partitions.

The above procedure is quite CPU-intensive, but has the crucial
property of giving repeatable results across all cluster members, which
may be running on disparate JVM implementations.

Another common choice is to use Java's standard `Object.hashCode()`. It
is often significantly faster. However, it is not a safe strategy in
general because `hashCode()`'s contract does not require repeatable
results across JVMs, or even different instances of the same JVM
version. If a given class's Javadoc explicitly specifies the hashing
function used, then its instances are safe to partition with
`hashCode()`.

You can provide your own implementation of `Partitioner` to gain full
control over the partitioning strategy.

We use both partitioning strategies in the Word Count example:

```java
dag.edge(between(tokenizer, accumulate)
           .partitioned(wholeItem(), Partitioner.HASH_CODE))
   .edge(between(accumulate, combine)
           .distributed()
           .partitioned(entryKey()))
```

The local-partitioned edge uses partitioning by hash code and the
distributed edge uses the default Hazelcast partitioning, to ensure
correctness. Note that a detailed inspection of the data types that
travel on the distributed edge reveals for that particular case that the
hashcode-based partitioning would work on the distributed edge as well.
We use Hazelcast partitioning nevertheless, for demonstration purposes.
Since much less data travels towards the combiner than towards the
accumulator, the performance of the whole job is hardly affected by this
choice.

### All-To-One

The all-to-one routing policy is a special case of the `partitioned`
policy which assigns the same partition ID to all items. The partition
ID is randomly chosen at job initialization time. This policy makes
sense on a distributed edge when all the items from all the members must
be routed to the same member and the same processor instance running on
it. Local parallelism of the target vertex should be set to 1, otherwise
there will be idle processors that never get any items.

On a local edge this policy doesn't make sense since simply setting the
local parallelism of the target vertex to 1 constrains the local choice
to just one processor instance.

In the `TopNStocks` example the stream-processing job must find the
stocks with fastest-changing prices. To achieve this a single processor
must see the complete picture, so an all-to-one edge is employed:

```java
dag.edge(between(topNStage1, topNStage2).distributed().allToOne())
```

## Priority

By default the processor receives items from all inbound edges as they
arrive. However, there are important cases where an edge must be
consumed in full to make the processor ready to accept data from other
edges. A major example is a "hash join" which enriches the data stream
with data from a lookup table. This can be modeled as a join of two data
streams where the _enriching_ stream contains the data for the lookup
table and must be consumed in full before consuming the stream to be
enriched.

The `priority` property controls the order of consuming the edges. Edges
are sorted by their priority number (ascending) and consumed in that
order. Edges with the same priority are consumed without particular
ordering (as the data arrives).

We can see a prioritized edge in action in the
[TF-IDF](https://github.com/hazelcast//hazelcast-jet-code-samples/blob/0.5-maintenance/core-api/batch/tf-idf/src/main/java/TfIdf.java)
example:

```java
dag.edge(between(stopwordSource, tokenize).broadcast().priority(-1))
```

The `tokenize` vertex performs lookup table-based filtering of words. It
must receive the entire lookup table before beginning to process the
data.

### A Fault Tolerance Caveat

As explained in the section on the
[Processor](Expert_Zone_--_The_Core_API/Processor#page_Snapshotting+Callbacks)
API, Jet takes regular snapshots of processor state when fault tolerance
is enabled. A processor will get a special item in its input stream,
called a _barrier_. When working in the _exactly once_ mode, as soon as
it receives it, it must stop pulling the data from that stream, wait for
the same barrier in all other streams, and then emit its state to the
snapshot storage. This is in direct contradiction with the contract of
edge prioritization: the processor is not allowed to consume any other
streams before having fully exhausted the prioritized ones.

This is why Jet does not initiate a snapshot until all the high-priority
edges have been fully consumed.

Although strictly speaking this only applies to the _exactly once_ mode,
Jet postpones taking the snapshot in _at least once_ mode as well. Even
though the snapshot could begin early, it would still not be able to
complete until the prioritized edges have been consumed. The result
would be just that there are many more items processed twice after the
restart.

## Fine-Tuning Edges

Edges can be configured with an
[`EdgeConfig`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/config/EdgeConfig.html)
instance, which specifies additional fine-tuning parameters. For
example,

```java
dag.edge(between(tickerSource, generateTrades)
        .setConfig(new EdgeConfig().setQueueSize(512)));
```

Please refer to the Javadoc of
[`EdgeConfig`](http://docs.hazelcast.org/docs/jet/0.5/javadoc/com/hazelcast/jet/config/EdgeConfig.html)
for details.
